docs/_topics/spacing-vs-tracking.md, before:

---
title  : Spaxing axis vs. tracking
layout : default
order  : 1
---

Looking into the fundamental differences between tracking and the spacing axis.
{: .lead }

* Table of Contents
{:toc}


Introduction
------------

In this page we are investigating and comparing two fundamentally different ways to a modify a font’s spacing:

1. through the **tracking function** provided by applications (the current standard approach)
2. through the **spacing axis** provided by the designer (a new approach)

We hope to demonstrate the advantages of the new approach in both tight and loose text settings.

### What we are looking at

The illustrations are generated with [DrawBot] from a designspace file and related UFO sources. Individual font locations are instantiated with [ufoProcessor].

The typesetting code was written from scratch for the purpose of this demonstration. It handles spacing, tracking and kerning. Tracking is expressed in *thousands of em*; kerning is expressed in font units.

The demo font is a simplified version of [Roboto] containing fewer characters and only a weight axis. The spacing axis is implemented using the [Spacing States tool].

The illustrations show a range of 5 steps with different spacing or tracking settings, going from loose (`100`) to default (`0`) to tight (`-100`). The colors are used to reveal how the different types of whitespace interact.


Basic typesetting
-----------------

Let’s start by looking at the basic typesetting mechanism at work, without kerning.

### Tracking

Tracking makes text tighter or looser by adding or removing a fixed amount of space *after* each glyph. The glyph boxes and their left and right margins don’t change.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_1.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight settings, the glyph boxes overlap with one another by a fixed negative amount. As the tracking value decreases, glyph collisions and occlusions appear unevenly. There is no limit for maximum or minimum tracking values.

### Spacing axis

The spacing axis makes text tighter or looser by modifying the glyph boxes, reducing or increasing the left and right margins. There is no tracking involved.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_2.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight settings, the left and right margins are reduced to zero causing glyph edges to touch; there is no lower setting beyond that. Glyph occlusions do not occur.


Adding kerning to the mix
-------------------------

To get the full picture we need to turn on kerning and add it to the visualization.

### Tracking

Automatic tracking employs **static kerning**: the same set of kerning values is used for default, tight and loose spacing settings.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_3.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight and loose settings, kerning values loose their reference and interact wit tracking in a way which designers cannot control.

### Spacing axis

The spacing axis employs **variable kerning**: the kerning values can be different for default, tight and loose spacing settings.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_4.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight settings, kerning is adjusted to allow characters to touch but not overlap. In loose settings, kerning is adjusted to give text an even rhtyhm.


Comparing the result
--------------------

The animations below allow us to compare the different results of tracking and the spacing axis:

### Tight spacing

<div id="carousel_tight" class="carousel slide carousel-fade" data-bs-ride="carousel">
  <div class="carousel-inner">
    <div class="carousel-item active">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_7.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
    <div class="carousel-item">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_8.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

### Loose spacing

<div id="carousel_loose" class="carousel slide carousel-fade" data-bs-ride="carousel">
  <div class="carousel-inner">
    <div class="carousel-item active">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_5.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
    <div class="carousel-item">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_6.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

### Advantages of the spacing axis

- better distribution of whitespace between the glyphs thanks to proportional scaling
- in tight settings: maximum tightness by allowing glyphs to touch but not overlap
- in loose settings: more even text rhythm 


[Roboto]: http://github.com/googlefonts/roboto
[DrawBot]: http://www.drawbot.com/
[ufoProcessor]: http://github.com/LettError/ufoProcessor
[Spacing States tool]: ../reference/spacing-states-tool

Commit message:

more work on tracking vs spacing axis, adding loose spacing states, etc

docs/_topics/spacing-vs-tracking.md, after:

---
title  : Spaxing axis vs. tracking
layout : default
order  : 1
---

Looking into the fundamental differences between tracking and the spacing axis.
{: .lead }

* Table of Contents
{:toc}


Introduction
------------

In this page we are investigating and comparing two fundamentally different ways to a modify a font’s spacing:

1. through the **tracking function** provided by applications (the current standard approach)
2. through the **spacing axis** provided by the designer (a new approach)

We hope to demonstrate the advantages of the new approach in both tight and loose text settings.

### What we are looking at

The illustrations are generated with [DrawBot] from a designspace file and related UFO sources. Individual font locations are instantiated with [ufoProcessor].

The typesetting code was written from scratch for the purpose of this demonstration. It handles spacing, tracking and kerning. Tracking is expressed in *thousands of em*; kerning is expressed in font units. This behaviour replicates existing typesetting engines.

The demo font is a simplified version of [Roboto] containing fewer characters and only a weight axis. The spacing axis is implemented using the [Spacing States tool].

The illustrations show a range of 5 steps with different spacing or tracking settings, going from loose (`100`) to default (`0`) to tight (`-100`). The colors are used to reveal how the different types of whitespace interact.


Basic typesetting
-----------------

Let’s start by looking at the basic typesetting mechanism at work, without involving kerning at first.

### Tracking

Tracking makes text tighter or looser by adding or removing a fixed amount of space *after* each glyph. The glyph boxes and their left and right margins don’t change.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_1.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight settings, the glyph boxes overlap with one another by a fixed negative amount. As the tracking value decreases, glyph collisions and occlusions appear unevenly. There is no limit for maximum or minimum tracking values.

### Spacing axis

The spacing axis makes text tighter or looser by modifying the glyph boxes, reducing or increasing the left and right margins. There is no tracking involved.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_2.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight settings, the left and right margins tend to zero, when glyph edges are allowed to touch; this is the minimum value for the axis. Glyph occlusions do not occur.


Adding kerning to the mix
-------------------------

To get the full picture we need to turn on kerning and add it to the visualization.

### Tracking

Automatic tracking employs **static kerning**: the same set of kerning values is used for default, tight and loose spacing settings.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_3.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight and loose settings, kerning values loose their reference as the whitespace between glyphs changes. Furthermore, kerning interacts with tracking in a way which is hard to predict and control.

### Spacing axis

The spacing axis employs **variable kerning**: the kerning values are designed to be different for default, tight and loose spacing settings.

![]({{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_4.png){: .img-fluid}

In tight settings, kerning is adjusted to allow characters to touch, but not overlap.

In loose settings, kerning is adjusted to give text a more even rhtyhm.


Comparing the results
---------------------

The animations below allow us to compare the different results of tracking and the spacing axis. Tight and loose settings are shown separately for more axis resolution and better analysis of the intermediate steps.

### Tight spacing

<div id="carousel_tight" class="carousel slide carousel-fade" data-bs-ride="carousel">
  <div class="carousel-inner">
    <div class="carousel-item active">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_7.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
    <div class="carousel-item">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_8.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="alert alert-warning" role="alert" markdown='1'>
- The tight spacing produced by the spacing axis is currently considerably tighter (denser) than tracking by the same value. It is probably preferrable if they match in terms of overall grey value. We can try matching the fully collapsed margins to `-150` instead of `100`, for example.
- The current ‘tight’ minimum value for the spacing axis is when margins are `0` and glyph edges start to touch. We can try going one step beyond that and allow glyphs to overlap (but not obstruct).
{: .card-text }
</div>

### Loose spacing

<div id="carousel_loose" class="carousel slide carousel-fade" data-bs-ride="carousel">
  <div class="carousel-inner">
    <div class="carousel-item active">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_5.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
    <div class="carousel-item">
      <img src="{{ site.url }}/images/spacing-axis-vs-tracking_6.png" class="d-block w-100" alt="...">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

<div class="alert alert-warning" role="alert" markdown='1'>
- Loose spacing sources were produced by adding `100` units to both left and right margins of each glyph. The kerning was then adjusted accordingly.
- The spacing axis makes spacing looser by adding space to both left and right margins, instead of just to the right margin as tracking. This causes a visible shift to the first letter.
{: .card-text }
</div>

### Advantages of the spacing axis

- better distribution of whitespace between the glyphs thanks to proportional scaling
- in tight settings: maximum tightness by allowing glyphs to touch at the same location
- in loose settings: more even text rhythm 

### Disadvantages of the spacing axis

- more work for the type designer (more sources, more kerning)
- in tight settings: no overlapping allowed (yet)
- in loose settings: awkward first-letter shift


[Roboto]: http://github.com/googlefonts/roboto
[DrawBot]: http://www.drawbot.com/
[ufoProcessor]: http://github.com/LettError/ufoProcessor
[Spacing States tool]: ../reference/spacing-states-tool
